Add "Branching" workflow to git workflow guide (#108)
spacetelescope/style-guides: guides/git-workflow.md

## Which workflow should I use? <a name="which-workflow"></a>
There are various pros and cons to each workflow, and it may not be obvious as to which workflow is best to choose for your project.  However, the power and benefit of the workflow comes in its consistent use across all team members and collaborators during the development of the software.

### Branching Workflow <a name="branching-pros-cons"></a>

> **Pros:**

Reviewer: Another substantial pro for this workflow is: 
- Easily allows multiple developers to contribute commits to a single feature or PR. Any team member with write access to the repository can collaborate directly in adding code, revising, or testing that branch.

Reviewer 2: Multiple people working directly on the same branch can easily become a "con" if there is insufficient coordination. 🤷

Reviewer: right, but it's also literally required in other cases! That's my whole point, one team's pro is another team's con, so there's not one right way of doing this all. :-)

Author: To Marshall's "one team's pro is another team's con" point -- I am wondering if we should not have a pros/cons list at all, but rather a single list of "things to consider".  Calling something a "pro" or a "con" can tend to carry a lot of weight 🤔

> - Continuous integration tools such as Travis or Jenkins can be easily enabled for all branches of the repository, so new feature branches can automatically be tested when a pull request is opened or modified.

Reviewer 3: Whether it can run on a fork depends on the CI tool. Some require a ton of additional overhead like Jenkins, Kubernetes, or Gitlab CI, and those might require access to test machines that aren't publicly accessible. I would keep in mind throughout all this that some teams are making repositories that are public or private in GitHub, private in grit.stsci.edu, and ITAR restricted private in gitar.stsci.edu.

I agree with avoiding the word "easily" here. Maybe remove that word and maybe state that CI tools can be enabled in a single location for all branches.

> - Continuous integration tools such as Travis or Jenkins can be easily enabled for all branches of the repository, so new feature branches can automatically be tested when a pull request is opened or modified.

Author: This sounds great, thanks!

**Cons:**

> - It is not possible for external collaborators to contribute unless they explicitly have write access to the `spacetelescope` repository.

Author: Great suggestion, thanks!

- It is easier to accidentally delete or overwrite the work of others who are also working on the same branch, or happen to have their own branch of the same name.  While it is possible to recover this work or to restrict the editing of specific branches to only select developers, it can sometimes be a painstaking process.

> - Repositories may accrue a fair amount of stale branches over time, which may become burdensome for developers, and may cause collaborators to infer that the project is not being maintained.

Reviewer: I don't think this is really a 'con', rather it is 'if you use this model, you should make sure to delete branches after they have been merged and are no longer needed.' The "delete branch" button in Github means this takes approximately 0.1 s to do after a merge. ;-)

> - Repositories may accrue a fair amount of stale branches over time, which may become burdensome for developers, and may cause collaborators to infer that the project is not being maintained.

Reviewer 2: @mperrin , deleting branch soon after merge does not solve the problem of a repository having many things being worked on in different branches at the same time and they all take a while to complete. It is not uncommon to have a PR opened for months or years without resolution.

> - Repositories may accrue a fair amount of stale branches over time, which may become burdensome for developers, and may cause collaborators to infer that the project is not being maintained.

Reviewer 3: This is a true con, there can be a lot of branches for features put on hold and it's the reason I typically don't look at remote branches unless I have to. It's the responsibility of the developers to 1) run `git fetch --prune` once in a while and 2) delete branches once merged or have a script running to delete anything merged into master.

> - Repositories may accrue a fair amount of stale branches over time, which may become burdensome for developers, and may cause collaborators to infer that the project is not being maintained.

Author: Thanks for the comments.  By slight majority here, I sounds like we should keep this bullet in here (at least for now).

### Forking Workflow <a name="forking-pros-cons"></a>

**Pros:**

> - Promotes "open development", wherein potential external collaborators who are interested in contributing may do so despite not having write access to the `spacetelescope` repository.

Author: @pllim I believe your suggestion is the grammatically correct one, which is annoying because I really dislike it 😅

> - Provides a consistent experience and barrier-to-entry for everyone involved in the project, whether you are an internal or external collaborator.

Reviewer: I don't like the phrasing here - a "barrier to entry" is not a desirable pro. A consistent experience is, sure. So I suggest deleting the words "and barrier to entry" here.

> - Provides a consistent experience and barrier-to-entry for everyone involved in the project, whether you are an internal or external collaborator.

Author: "A consistent experience" does sound much better!

> - Allows for an explicit namespace in pull requests and repository history that makes it more apparent who "owns" which branch.

Author: Thanks, I am adding some more words and an example here to hopefully clarify.

- Allows for contributors to experiment with various repository settings and/or continuous integrations tools without affecting how the `spacetelescope` repository operates.

**Cons:**

> - Requires extra work to keep up-to-date with the parent, 'upstream' repository (i.e. one must periodically "update" their personal fork).

Reviewer 3: Maybe mentioning that it requires knowledge of how to work with multiple remotes?

> - Requires extra work to keep up-to-date with the parent, 'upstream' repository (i.e. one must periodically "update" their personal fork).

Author: Good suggestion.  I will clarify that the "extra work" really just translates to "managing remotes".

> - If forks are of a public repository, and more than one person wants to collaborate on someone's personal fork, then one must add each colleague to your fork.

Reviewer: This is (in my opinion) a main motivating use case for the branching workflow instead. If you have a branch that you want multiple people to collaborate on, then it's useful for that branch to be in the shared organizational repository, rather than a branch in someone's fork. The forking into each developer's personal repo model works well for the use case of "one developer per feature (per fork or per branch)". That's true often, but not always...

> - If forks are of a public repository, and more than one person wants to collaborate on someone's personal fork, then one must add each colleague to your fork.

Reviewer 2: I still don't see the problem. One can PR (from one's own fork) to an existing PR (from another's fork). Slightly more complicated, yes, but not impossible.

Also, if you are a maintainer of the main repo, you can also push directly to someone else's branch that is tied to the PR, even if the PR is opened from a fork.

> - If forks are of a public repository, and more than one person wants to collaborate on someone's personal fork, then one must add each colleague to your fork.

Author: I think the point I was trying to make here is that, if someone would like to push changes directly to someone else's personal fork, the pusher does not inherently have write access and must be added as a collaborator to the fork.

So perhaps I can just change this to:
>If a person wants to collaborate on a someone's personal fork directly, the one must be explicitly added as a collaborator to that fork.

?

> - If forks are of a public repository, and more than one person wants to collaborate on someone's personal fork, then one must add each colleague to your fork.

Reviewer 2: > If a person wants to collaborate on a someone's personal fork directly, the one must be explicitly added as a collaborator to that fork.

That is only necessary if that person is *not* a maintainer of upstream repo of which a PR is opened from that branch.

- If forks are of a private repository, then everyone watching the parent repository is automatically subscribed to all of the fork activity by default.  These notifications may become burdensome.

## Workflow Instructions <a name="workflow-instructions"></a>

Below we provide step-by-step instructions on how to employ each workflow.

### Opening a GitHub Issue <a name="github-issue"></a>

> Regardless of which workflow you chose, before contributing, you should determine if the eventual change is significant enough to warrant a GitHub issue; if you think that this change will be solving a significant problem or providing a significant enhancement to the project, then it would be advantageous to open an issue under the `spacetelescope` repository. This will allow both contributors and repository maintainers to keep track of the project and capture any needed context of the particular change. Any appropriate individuals should be assigned to the issue, and any appropriate label(s) should be tagged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regardless of which workflow you choose, before contributing, you should determine if the eventual change is significant enough to warrant a GitHub issue; if you think that this change will be solving a significant problem or providing a significant enhancement to the project, then it would be advantageous to open an issue under the `spacetelescope` repository. This will allow both contributors and repository maintainers to keep track of the project and capture any needed context of the particular change. Any appropriate individuals should be assigned to the issue, and any appropriate label(s) should be tagged.

Meanwhile, for trivial fixes (e.g., typo), a pull request without an accompanying issue would be acceptable.
```

Author: This is great, thanks!

### The Branching Workflow <a name="branching-workflow"></a>

1. Make a local copy of the `spacetelescope` repository by cloning the repository (e.g. `git clone https://github.com/username/repository_name.git`).  Note that, unless you explicitly delete your clone of the repository, this only has to be done once.

2. Ensure that your clone is pointing to the `spacetelescope` remote repository with `git remote -v`.  You should see that `origin` corresponds to the URL from step (1).  If it doesn't, you can add it with `git remote add origin https://github.com/username/repository_name.git`.

> 3. Create a branch on the clone to develop software changes on.  Branch names should be short but descriptive (e.g. `new-database-table` or `fix-ingest-algorithm`), and not too generic (e.g. `big-fix`).  Consistent use of hyphens is encouraged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Create a branch on the clone to develop software changes on.  Branch names should be short but descriptive (e.g. `new-database-table` or `fix-ingest-algorithm`), and not too generic (e.g. `bug-fix`).  Consistent use of hyphens is encouraged.
```

Author: Great suggestion

    1. `git branch <branchname>`
    2. `git checkout <branchname>` - you can use this command to switch back and forth between existing branches.
    3. Perform local software changes using the nominal `git add`/`git commit -m` cycle:
       1. `git status` -  allows you to see which files have changed.
       2. `git add <new or changed files you want to commit>`
       3. `git commit -m 'Explanation of changes you've done with these files'`

4. Push the branch to the `spacetelescope` repository with `git push origin <branchname>`.

> 5. In the `spacetelescope` repository, create a pull request for the recently pushed branch.  You will want to set the "base" option to point to the branch you would like to merge changes into (e.g. `master`), and the "compare" option to point to the new branch (i.e. `<branchname>`).  Note that if the branch is still under heavy development, you can put `WIP:` at the beginning of the pull request title to signify that the pull request is still a work in progress (i.e. `WIP: Example Pull Request Title`).  Not until the `WIP:` tag is explicitly removed will the pull request be deemed 'mergeable'.

Reviewer: This bit about 'WIP' should be removed and replaced instead with reference to using the Draft PR function.

Author: Great suggestion

6. Assign the pull request a reviewer, selecting a maintainer of the `spacetelescope` repository.  They will review your pull request and either accept the request and merge, or ask for additional changes.

7. Iterate with your reviewer(s) on additional changes if necessary, addressing any comments on your pull request.  If changes are required, you may end up iterating over steps 3.ii, 3.iii and 4 several times while working with your reviewer.

> 8. Once the pull request has been accepted and merged, you can delete your local branch with `git branch -d <branchname>`.

Reviewer 2: Is deleting the branch recommended for this workflow? I know people from both sides and they usually feel strongly one way or another. What is STScI's stance on this? Do we have one?

Reviewer 3: I would recommend it because there's no use for the branch anymore, but I don't think there's an official verdict on this.

Author: Yeah, i'm not sure that there is an official recommendation. I suggest we purposely leave it vague for now.

The following describes two different workflows for contributing software to an open-source repository on GitHub under the `spacetelescope` organization (hereby referred to as the "`spacetelescope` repository"). One model involves creating branches off of the `spacetelescope` repository directly (hereby referred to as the "branching workflow"), while the other involves forking the `spacetelescope` repository and developing changes on personal branches of the fork (hereby referred to as the "forking workflow").  Regardless of which model is chosen, software changes ultimately get incorporated into the `spacetelescope` repository through pull requests.  Below, we provide some pros/cons for each workflow.  We encourage developers to chose a workflow that is most appropriate for your repository.

## Which workflow should I use? <a name="which-workflow"></a>

> There are various pros and cons to each workflow, and it may not be obvious as to which workflow is best to choose for your project.  However, the power and benefit of the workflow comes in its consistent use across all team members and collaborators during the development of the software.  Provided below are a few things to consider when choosing a particular workflow.

Reviewer 3: Much better wording.

6. In the `spacetelescope` repository, create a pull request for the recently pushed branch.  You will want to set the base fork pointing to `spacetelescope:master` and the `head` fork pointing to the branch on your personal fork (i.e. `username:branchname`).  Note that if the branch is still under heavy development, you can put `WIP:` at the beginning of the pull request title to signify that the pull request is still a work in progress (i.e. `WIP: Example Pull Request Title`).  Not until the `WIP:` tag is explicitly removed will the pull request be deemed 'mergeable'.

7. Assign the pull request a reviewer, selecting a maintainer of the `spacetelescope` repository.  They will review your pull request and either accept the request and merge, or ask for additional changes.

8. Iterate with your reviewer(s) on additional changes if necessary, addressing any comments on your pull request.  If changes are required, you may end up iterating over steps 4.ii, 4.iii and 5 several times while working with your reviewer.

9. Once the pull request has been accepted and merged, you can delete your local branch with `git branch -d <branchname>`.

> #### Keeping your fork updated <a name="update-fork"></a>

Reviewer 2: I feel like this also applies to branching workflow. 🤷

Reviewer: Yeah there are many steps that are the same between each work flow. 

This might take a little work with the markdown syntax to pull off, but I can imagine presenting this all as a two column table instead. Left hand column for branching, right hand column for forking. And steps that are identical between the two workflows span both columns.

Author: This sounds like a great improvement in a future PR! 😉

Author: But yes, I will add some instruction here on how to keep a branch updated as well.
